[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>KAYLA OSTERHOFF: I
ended up in the field
of neuropsychophysiology.
There are actually
many differences
in how the brain functions and
operates between men and women.
The way that our societies
are set up actually
work against the female biology.
It eventually leads
women to burn out.
Women's biology
follows a cyclic nature
because of the influence
of their menstrual--
their ovarian hormones.
Women are psychologically
programmed to think
for the collective,
and so you could
say that the female brain is
actually wired for leadership.
Women are the greatest
untapped resource
that modern society
has access to
in order to create massive
global change and evolution.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
It's decades overdue,
but the world of
neuropsychology is finally
studying the unique
characteristics
of the male and female brains.
And lo and behold,
we're totally different.
First off, the female brain
is wired for leadership.
So why aren't we in more
positions of leadership?
Kayla Osterhoff has
spent years researching
in this field of
gender neurobiology
and has come to some
profound discoveries.
Welcome, Kayla.
We meet again.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: I'm so happy
to have you here.
The last interview I did
with you got such a response
from women, because
they'd never heard this
reflected back about themselves.
And it was very heavy
female response on this.
So first of all, let--
get into a little bit
of your own background and how
you ended up in this field.
And then we're going to get into
the history of why women were
never even included
in most studies,
including pharmaceutical
studies and so forth, yet we're
having to contend with whatever
the outcome of studies tailored
for men are.
So tell us about you first.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
Thank you so much
for having me on.
I am so excited for
this conversation,
and it's not surprising that we
had a big response from women
and, I noticed, a
nice response from men
as well, just saying, wow, I've
never heard this information--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: --before.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: And
it's not surprising,
because this information isn't
widely publicly available.
And hopefully, our talks
and interviews like this
can start to shift that.
>>REGINA: It's really critical.
>>OSTERHOFF: It actually is.
>>REGINA: So how did you
end up in this field?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah, so
I ended up in the field
of neuropsychophysiology,
because I am just
fascinated by human behavior
and what drives human behavior.
And so I've studied the health
sciences my entire life.
I studied in my
undergrad health ecology
and actually was on track
to work in physical therapy.
But along that way, I
actually had some experiences
with my own family in
the medical systems
that shifted me to
become interested
in public health and public
health policy and public health
systems.
So I went on to get my master's
degree in public health.
And then I went to work for
the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention for several
years as a health scientist,
and all along the way,
I've had this fascination
about what drives
human behavior and also
how our biological and
neurological processes work.
And so now, I'm pursuing
my doctoral degree
in the field of
neuropsychophysiology, which
is the field of
mind-body medicine
or the mind-body interaction and
the interaction, specifically,
between the brain and the mind.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yeah, and our connection
was Katrine Volynsky, who
I've had on this show before.
And she's hardcore
on the science part,
and she said, you have
to interview Kayla,
because you're doing
breakthrough work.
So with that said, now let's
go into the history of how
women have been
excluded, historically,
especially in the past--
a little different in
the last 20, 30 years--
from trials and studies.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah,
so women actually
represent the largest gap in
our health science research
and understanding of
human biology, which
is really kind of concerning,
and it's interesting.
>>REGINA: That's half
the people on the planet.
>>OSTERHOFF: Exactly, right?
We're talking about, actually,
51% of the population
that is really not
well represented
in the clinical research and
also greatly misunderstood.
And so this actually goes back
to the beginning of research,
but this was solidified back
in 1977, when the FDA formally
banned all women of
childbearing potential
from all clinical research.
Now, this ban remained
in effect until 1993,
when it was overturned.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: And even
since then, the damage
has been done, and to this
day, surprisingly, shockingly,
women are still very
underrepresented
in our scientific research.
Now, this is because of a
couple of really good reasons,
though it doesn't make it right.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>OSTERHOFF: But
one of the reasons
is that women are risky
research subjects.
And what I mean by that is
that women can potentially
become pregnant at any time.
And so for safety,
researchers leave
women out of research
because of that potential
that they could become
pregnant during the study.
So, of course, this is women
of childbearing potential.
>>REGINA: Right.
But that's still
a large age group.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, yes.
It's still the
majority of women.
And the other reason is that
women are difficult research
subjects.
And what I mean by that is
that we are biochemically
and neurochemically
changing consistently
throughout the
course of a month.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: This
is not the case
with our male counterparts,
who are consistently
the same day in and day out.
>>REGINA: 24-hour
cycle hormonally.
In a little bit, we're
going to break down
those cycles of the
female on a 28-day basis
and see where the potential lies
for us to really, as you call
them, develop our superpowers.
So before we go
into all of that,
you and I were joking
before about I said to you,
can you fathom what
in the world it
would take to have a group
of women in an encampment,
living in horrid conditions,
waiting for the crack of dawn
and on orders from
their commander,
run into opposing bayonets?
I can't fathom any
circumstance in which
you would find a group of
women doing that, right?
Well, and so we were joking
about this, because there's
a reason that men
can do that and do
do that and that women probably
would likely never do that.
So let's just go
there to begin with,
because I love the
story of consequence.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, and thank you
for bringing up consequence.
This is so important when we're
talking about human psychology
and exactly what you're talking
about-- these differences
between men and women
psychologically.
When we're looking
at women and we're
looking at women's
psychology, we
see a couple of
differences in the way
that we mentally operate, right?
And, of course, women
have been regarded
as emotional and as leading
with our hearts instead
of their minds maybe.
And that's not necessarily
accurate, but what is happening
is that women are
psychologically
programmed to think
for the collective.
And what that means
is, passed down
through generations and
generations of women who
have been in caretaker roles--
right, so this is passed
down epigenetically
through generations of women,
the ability to think for others
or think about the impact of our
behaviors on those around us.
>>REGINA: Well, it
makes perfect sense.
As moms, you want to make
sure your kids grow up
and make it into
adulthood and your parents
and so forth and just
make-- this is the way we've
evolved for a purpose.
Someone has to be
taking care of the kids,
and someone has to
be testing the edges.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, exactly.
And so this is actually
one of our superpowers
for leadership as women.
Because we are
constantly concerned
about how our actions
impact those around us,
we make decisions
for the collective
or thinking about the impact
on the greater collective.
So when you think about
that in a leadership role,
that's actually a
great quality to have.
>>REGINA: One would think
an essential quality.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, yeah.
>>REGINA: I mean, the way
we've been set up historically
as a result of the church
and patriarchal times--
and we go through
waves when we've
come-- we're just now emerging
from a very heavy period
of patriarchy for
thousands of years,
where the men have become
in control and dominant.
This whole notion of consequence
has been thrown aside,
and what we see is
just perpetual war,
grabbing other people's
stuff and trying
to claim it as your own, as
your own territory and so forth.
And I would like to
hear both sides--
why this comes more naturally
to men to do it that way
and why the women would
respond in the opposite manner.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah,
so when you're
looking at the neurology
of men and women,
there's many differences.
But one really interesting
one that impacts our behavior
and what drives our
behavior and the differences
between men and women are
specific neurotransmitters,
so neurochemicals that
impact our behavior
and regulate our
neurological function.
So when we're looking at
our male counterparts,
their master
neuroregulator, that kind of
sets the pace for
everything else
and keeps everything
in order, is dopamine.
>>REGINA: Go, go, go.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
Dopamine is our reward
chemical of the brain,
and so if you think
about-- look at,
in society, not only with
war and things like that,
but if you just look
at the constructs
and environments
and infrastructures
that we have in our society,
they are very dopamine-driven,
meaning that our society
is set up in such a way
that we are getting
constant hits of dopamine.
Making achievements or
checking things off to-do list
or getting rewards and
recognition and accolades,
things like that are little hits
of dopamine that can happen,
right, throughout the day.
>>REGINA: So you're
getting that reinforcement,
and you have adrenaline feeding
into it if it's a high risk
situation--
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: --for example.
And I remember one
of the studies,
a million-plus people globally,
MRIs of male and female
brains--
that center that takes
consequence into consideration
isn't as well lit up in
men as it is with women.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so
there are actually
many differences in how the
brain functions and operates
between men and women.
And so going back to that
master neuro regulator,
the interesting thing about that
is, for women, our master neuro
regulator is not dopamine.
It's oxytocin.
And you know what oxytocin is?
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: It's given the
nickname, "the cuddle hormone,"
right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: That's--
>>REGINA: The connection--
the mother and baby.
Mm-hmm.
>>OSTERHOFF: It's
about connection, yes.
So in order for women to
operate neurologically
at an optimal level,
they need to have
healthy levels of oxytocin.
So if you really think about
that, think about society
and the women out there
working in the workforce
in this dopamine-dominant
kind of situation day in
and day out, they're getting
all these hits of dopamine,
but maybe they're not
getting enough opportunities
for oxytocin.
>>REGINA: Right.
Oh, this has so
many implications.
Continue, and we'll
get into some of them.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
And so the even more interesting
and maybe even devastating
part about this is that
dopamine squelches oxytocin.
>>REGINA: And yet in this
post-industrial world,
all of our systems are set
up on that male model that
produces dopamine.
This is devastating.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: Because
I said in the open,
why aren't women in more
leadership positions?
Well, you have the obvious.
You know, if you're
going into deep banking
structures, good old boys
club, personal connections
through society and so forth.
I get all that.
But as you keep descending
kind of from that level,
still, women aren't
represented properly yet
in leadership capacities,
when we're naturally oriented
to do that well.
So let's talk about that
and why it's not happening
and why it probably
shouldn't even
happen the way it's structured
right now in the workforce.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes,
you're exactly right.
And you know what we're talking
about is how women are really
wired for leadership, though
we don't see this reflected
in the statistics.
Maybe there's in
between 18% and 20%
of women in leadership roles
in positions across the United
States, and why
isn't it more equal
or even flipped the other way?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: And that's
because of many things,
as you mentioned.
But one major, major
piece goes back
to this scientific gap, this
gender gap in our research.
Women are completely
misunderstood.
Women are not well represented
in the scientific literature
and education.
So what this boils down to is
that, one, our environments
and our infrastructures and
even expectations are set up
to really work well
with male biology
and the male
biorhythms, which we'll
talk about in more
detail in a minute.
But it really aligns
well with what's
going on with the male
body and is in alignment
with the male biological needs.
But for women, we
really miss the mark.
And that's because we don't
have the same understanding
about how women operate.
And what we're just now starting
to find out, or at least
from the scientific
community perspective,
is that women's biology
follows a cyclic nature,
meaning that women, as
we mentioned before,
are biochemically,
neurochemically,
and physiologically
changing significantly
throughout the course
of a month because
of the influence of
their menstrual--
their ovarian hormones
and their menstrual cycle.
Now, this has a global impact on
their body and how it operates.
And so what this
means is that women
require different environments,
infrastructures, schedules,
and even lifestyle
components to support
their ever-changing biology.
Now, as women, we're never
given the operation manual
for this feminine biology
that we've been gifted.
I say "we've been
gifted," because it's
so brilliantly designed.
But we were never given
the user's manual.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: So we're not
operating at our full capacity.
>>REGINA: Well, and
you think of this,
just getting down to
brass tacks, so to speak,
you think about a
war room situation,
where it's being with the
generals and the various people
that consult or
in on the meeting,
and what's going to
happen, whether there's
going to be aggressive action
taken or not and so forth.
Well, it seems to me
that that could only flow
better if you had women in it.
Now, maybe you wouldn't have
a war room to begin with.
Maybe you would.
I don't know.
But it seems it would
be natural for women
to have a stake in that
game, a say in that game,
because they're always
looking at the long term
consequence and the
consequence for all,
yet they're not in those rooms.
By and large, they're
not in those rooms.
And I'm not saying
this to slam men,
but you have the wrong
people at the helm,
particularly in
military situations.
But then the military
situations are there
because we've been having
this dopamine-driven culture
for thousands of years.
This is just kind of a
little dying remnant of it
in a certain sense.
So now, let's go into what
happens with the guys that
are in that war room, their
24-hour cycle and dopamine,
and how it actually,
for them, kind
of works in this system
as it exists right now.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah, so as
I was mentioning before,
that kind of a system--
first of all, a
repeating daily system,
which is how our society
is set up, but even kind
of that high pressure
situation, where you're
going to get lots
of hits of dopamine,
works really well for men.
And so they really thrive
in that kind of a situation.
>>REGINA: That's like
football and spectator sports
and getting jacked up
and even as a spectator,
no less a participant.
That's really kind of critical
for that dopamine production.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, absolutely.
And so men are thriving in these
kinds of environments, which
is wonderful,
because we absolutely
need masculine
leadership in this world.
And the great thing is we
have a lot of representation
of that already.
Now, what we need to
work on is representing
feminine leadership
in this world.
And the two are necessary.
We need both.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>OSTERHOFF: And
both need to marry
so that we can shift and evolve
our culture and our society
forward, which, as you
and I know and probably
all the viewers know, we
need that now more than ever.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So let's talk about the
24-hour cycle of men,
and then go into the much
more complex cycle of women,
and how would that
work in that situation?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
So the male biology,
as you mentioned,
is set to the pace of what are
called the adrenal hormones.
Now, this is a daily
repeating 24-hour system,
hormonal system, that
is driven by cortisol,
our stress hormone, and
melatonin, our sleep hormone.
Now, these two
hormones influence
and set the pace of the
greater male physiology
and all biological processes.
So every day, day in and
day out, men are pretty much
consistently the same.
Now, when we look
at our women, it's
a very different situation.
Yes, we have those
same adrenal hormones.
We have cortisol and melatonin,
and we have a sleep wake cycle.
However, our biology and
our greater physiology
across all systems are not set
to the pace of those hormones.
They are set to the pace of
two very different hormones
that come from our ovaries, so
our ovarian hormones, estrogen
and progesterone.
Now, the interesting thing is
that estrogen and progesterone
is set to a monthly cycle,
meaning that these two
important biochemicals
ebb and flow
throughout the
course of the month.
So there are certain times
during our cycle, where
we have higher
levels of estrogen,
and there are
certain times we have
higher levels of progesterone.
>>REGINA: So how
is that reflected
in how we function in the
world and our capabilities?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so
what's really fascinating
is when we look,
again, going back
to those brain scans
of men and women
and the differences, when we
look at the female brain, what
we see is that there
are certain areas that
have high densities of
estrogen and progesterone
receptors, namely the prefrontal
cortex, the hippocampus,
and the hypothalamus.
>>REGINA: And explain what
each one is responsible for.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, now
these three areas,
collectively, are responsible
for many leadership qualities,
including discernment,
decision-making, mental acuity,
emotional intelligence,
and memory consolidation,
amongst other things as well.
But all of these qualities
are very, very vital
for good leadership.
And so you could say that
the female brain is actually
wired for leadership.
And now, going back
to that cyclic nature
of those hormones--
>>REGINA: Right, because just
to interject for a moment,
so from a woman's
point of view, you
have periods of the month where
you're feeling highly energetic
highly creative, maybe
highly intuitive.
Then you feel like you're
on a slippery slope.
The energy is waning.
You don't have a lot of
energy or desire and so forth.
So let's talk about
what makes that happen,
and how do we work
that into life?
And then we're going
to talk about women
leaving the workforce.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so
this monthly cycle
that we have that's driven by
those changes in those ovarian
hormones impacts our
physiology at large.
And so not only does
this have an impact
on our reproductive
system, but it
has an impact on our
cardiovascular system,
our respiratory system,
our neurological systems,
our central and
peripheral nervous system,
our metabolic function,
and literally everything.
And so our physiology
is changing so much
over the course of a month,
that you could actually
say that women are actually
four different people
throughout the
course of a month,
considering the four different
phases of the menstrual cycle.
>>REGINA: I think a lot of
men would agree with that.
They'd say, jeez, I can't--
I don't know who
she's going to be.
And that's a cliche, but
there is a certain amount
of truth to it.
But we're also not
rocking the power in it.
>>OSTERHOFF: Exactly.
And this is the beauty and
this is the divine nature
of the female biology that
is so brilliantly designed,
because each of the four
phases has their own benefits
and their own limitations.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
it from day one of the cycle.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so phase
one is the menstruation phase.
And unfortunately, the
majority of women out there,
because of the lack of education
that we have about our bodies,
are really only aware
of this first phase.
But it's only one of four.
So in phase one,
menstruation, this
is marked by the lowest levels
of estrogen and progesterone,
these two key
ovarian hormones that
set the pace of our
biology at large.
Now, because estrogen
and progesterone
are at their lowest
levels, in phase one,
our energy levels are naturally
lower during this phase,
because we're actually
producing less ATP
to energize ourselves and
perform all the functions
that we need to perform, so
we have a little bit less fuel
available to us during
that first phase.
We also see our metabolic
function slow down.
And what we see neurologically
is kind of a different story.
So as things shift
neurologically
to kind of match this
ebb of those hormones,
what we see is that women have
enhanced cognitive empathy,
especially during this phase.
Now, that is just a fancy
scientific term for intuition.
So a woman's intuitive
insight is heightened
during phase one of her cycle.
>>REGINA: With the estrogen
and progesterone kind
of tanked for that period.
Yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so if
you think about this,
how brilliant is that?
Our body knows exactly what it
wants and needs in order for us
to tap into that
superpower that we get.
It is telling us, slow down.
And it's actually
not only telling us.
It is slowing it down.
>>REGINA: Demanding it, yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: It is
slowing us down,
and it's telling
us, hey, go inward.
Focus a little more
inward so that you
can tap into this cognitive
superpower of this heightened
intuitive insight.
So this is a great
time for assessment.
This is a great time
for internal reflection
or reflection on your projects.
If you think about women
in leadership roles,
this is when you should
be doing your analysis
and your strategic
kind of planning
and moving things around.
This is when you can
allocate your resources most
effectively,
because you're going
to be able to utilize
that intuitive insight
that you have.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
So that's the time-- if
you're in a capacity where
you work for yourself or it's a
small corporation where you can
manage your time as you wish,
if women were aware of this,
this would be, as you say,
the time of assessment
and planning.
Beautiful.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Now, what we typically see is
that we bypass this superpower.
We kind of skip over it.
>>REGINA: Drink more coffee.
Get more energy going.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yep, because
we ignore those cues
from our body, and we say,
oh, forget about that.
I'm not going to have
lower energy right now.
I'm going to drink an
extra cup of coffee,
and I'm going to take all
these supplements to ramp up
my metabolism and my focus.
And I'm going to
work out really hard,
and I'm just going
to push through.
>>REGINA: Get back
on that train.
>>OSTERHOFF: I'm just
going to push through.
And this comes from the
idea that consistency
is the key to success.
But I am here to tell
you and all women
out there that consistency is
the killer for success for us,
because we need to do things
in more of a fluid way.
>>REGINA: I love that.
I love-- and thank you, because
so many women feel the truth
in what you're saying already.
So let's go to the
next three phases.
I think this is just such
new and exciting information
for both women and men,
because it helps us understand
each other so much better.
So let's go to phase two.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, absolutely.
So phase two is called
the follicular phase.
And I have to give a
little bit of a caveat,
because each phase
doesn't fit perfectly
into its own little box.
However, the overall
shifts in our biochemistry
and our neurochemistry
and our physiological
function is marked by
four different phases
and what's going on with
our ovarian hormones
in those phases.
So phase two is the
follicular phase,
and this is marked
by a steady rise
to a peak in estrogen, one of
those key ovarian hormones.
Now, estrogen does some really
interesting things to us,
including it starts to ramp
up our production of ATP.
It starts to elevate
our energy levels.
It also starts to
help us increase
our stamina, our endurance,
our power, our strength.
And it increases our
metabolic function, of course.
That goes along with it.
But when we look at what's
going on neurologically
and cognitively,
what happens is we
get enhanced ability
for navigation
and enhanced ability for
kind of strategic action.
So what we also
see that's really
interesting in this
phase is enhanced
emotional intelligence.
So as we move through
the follicular
phase, our navigational,
strategic movements
are enhanced.
So if you think about
this, it can be really
a game changer in our
roles and especially
in leadership roles as women
when we can start to understand
and map out our lifestyles and
our efforts to match what's
going on in our bodies.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: So phase one,
we're doing our analysis.
Phase two, we're
shifting into action,
and we're able to
navigate more effectively.
And in tandem, our emotional
intelligence is rising.
So we're going to be able to
communicate more effectively
and interact with our teams
in a more profound way.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
OK, phase three.
>>OSTERHOFF: So phase three
is the ovulatory phase,
and this is a very short
phase, between one and three
days, depending on the
woman, and every woman
is different as well in
the length of her cycle.
But phase three,
the ovulation phase,
is marked by the
peak of estrogen,
but also the peak of
luteinizing hormone
and follicle-stimulating
hormone.
And so this is--
>>REGINA: FSH, yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah, and
so this is the phase
that I have nicknamed "the
bloom phase," because this
is when women are in bloom.
They're feeling their very best.
Their energy levels
are at their highest.
Their power, strength,
and endurance
are at their highest
level, and they are just
feeling cognitively on fire.
They're feeling very
focused and very energetic.
And when we look at this
cognitive benefit that
comes online, we have
more charismatic influence
during this time.
We're more magnetic,
you could say.
>>REGINA: That's key for
leadership, to have that phase.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Now, think about this.
If we could leverage
that to do our pitches--
>>REGINA: Right.
Any presentation, whatever
you're in, your presentation--
that's so important to
know, and we haven't a clue.
So we have a time
designed in our own cycle,
as women, where we can really
pull out the best in ourselves
to charismatically
influence an outcome.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, absolutely.
And we are feeling
socially outwardly focused
during this time, which is
a contrast to, for instance,
menstruation phase
one, when we're
feeling a little more subdued.
But during phase
three, not only are
we feeling very energetic
and outwardly focused,
but we also have a nice
boost in our mood-boosting
neurochemicals, namely
serotonin, dopamine,
epinephrine, and norepinephrine.
So we have a little boost
in these mood chemicals
that also makes us
feel very energetic
and vibrant and magnetic
during this phase.
>>REGINA: Phase four.
>>OSTERHOFF: So phase four--
this is my favorite
phase of all.
This is what I have
nicknamed "the grow phase,"
and what I mean by that is our
brain and our ability to learn
is actually growing
during this phase.
And luckily, this is
the longest of all four
phases, about two weeks.
Again, it's different
for every woman,
but during this
last phase, which
is called the luteal
phase, this is
when the key player, the star of
the show becomes progesterone.
And it shifts from
estrogen. So as progesterone
rises to a peak, there's some
really interesting things
that happen
neurologically for women.
One of them is that we get
a boost in a neurochemical
called brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, or BDNF.
Now, this neurochemical has
some really cool impacts
on the human brain, one of which
is increased neuroplasticity
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
So you can stretch
and grow, yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
So neuroplasticity is
related to neural pathways,
and you can think of
neural pathways as related
to behaviors.
And so our ability to change our
behaviors and learn new things
and create new neural
pathways and get
rid of old neural pathways
that we don't necessarily want
is heightened during this phase.
>>REGINA: So let
me ask you this.
Once you understood
all of this, I
assume you started applying
it to your own life.
And did you notice a difference
in your levels of intuition,
productivity, and everything?
>>OSTERHOFF: Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
It's been a game changer.
And all of the women who I've
had the ability to teach this
to have experienced
the same thing,
and it's so amazing to
watch the light bulb
turn on for women when they
learn about their body,
and they actually get permission
to be four different people
throughout the
course of the month
and operate differently and
tap into these superpowers.
It's just incredible.
It's one of the most
rewarding things
that I get to experience.
>>REGINA: I bet.
>>OSTERHOFF: So going back to
that brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, it also influences
our neurogenesis.
So not only do we have a
heightened ability to kind
of shape and mold the brain
and those neural pathways,
but we also have
a greater capacity
to actually grow new neurons.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
this is wonderful.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah,
so again, our brain
is actually growing
and shifting.
Our ability to learn is
heightened during this phase.
But there's also
another neurochemical
that comes online strongly
during this phase, which
is the GABA neurotransmitter.
Now, the GABA
neurotransmitter is
involved in getting
restful sleep and also
memory consolidation.
So we have heightened
memory consolidation, which
is important for learning.
And we have this
greater capacity,
greater ability to get the
benefits of restful sleep
during this phase.
>>REGINA: Thank you so much.
Thank you for
breaking those down
for us, because I know
women right now are stopping
to write things down and
saying, holy cow, I had no idea.
A couple of
practical questions--
so what happens if, say, a
woman's on birth control?
Does that change anything, or
does the same pattern apply?
>>OSTERHOFF: This
is a great question.
So no matter what the
woman's status is hormonally,
she will be experiencing the
cyclic nature to her biology.
So if a woman's on birth
control, which, by the way,
is a form of hormone
replacement therapy,
or if she's on hormone
replacement therapy
for a different purpose--
>>REGINA: Or post-menopausal.
>>OSTERHOFF: --or
post-menopausal, her body
still operates in
this cyclic fashion
and still goes through
these four phases.
Now, with women
post-menopausally,
this gets a little
more esoteric.
Simply--
>>REGINA: I was going to say
it has to be more subtle.
So talk about this
esoteric range then.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah, it's a
little more esoteric, just
simply because there is not
a lot of empirical evidence
that shows that women still
have this cyclic nature
to their biology.
And that's simply because it has
not been researched whatsoever.
>>REGINA: Right.
You're going to fix that.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
Yes.
However, what we see with the
anecdotal evidence of women
from around the world-- we're
talking hundreds and thousands
of women who report
still having this ebb
and flow in their energy
levels, in their mood,
in their cognitive function,
even after menopause.
And my theory, as a
scientist, in what's
going on with this is that
even post-menopausally,
women still have this cyclic
nature to their biology
that follows a monthly rhythm.
And the reason for that is
because, for so many years,
the majority of our lives,
our biology and physiology
has been groomed to
operate in this cyclic way.
Now, what happens at menopause
is the ovarian hormones
that are really running the
show for women pass on the baton
to the adrenals.
But that doesn't mean
that, at that point,
women just turn into men, right?
We still have much higher levels
of estrogen and progesterone
than our male counterparts.
And because our body
has been operating
in this cyclic
fashion for so long,
we still operate in
that way, or at least
that's what the anecdotal
evidence is showing.
And as you mentioned,
I really hope
that the empirical
research and evidence
will catch up and start
to take a look at this.
>>REGINA: Yes, and I
want to get to a couple
of other major points in
what time we have left,
and one of them is the
whole phenomena of COVID
and having people begin
working from home,
having women, who
were going to offices
and working in this most
kind of industrial model
that's more wired for dopamine
in men, were staying home.
And they were able to
follow these rhythms better,
and there has been a mass exodus
of women from the workforce.
And I'd like you to
share that, because I
don't think-- they
don't report that
much on the news about this.
Let's talk about
what's happening
and what's going to
happen from here out.
UK, for example, said, OK,
everybody, back to the office.
We're done with COVID, right?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: So what's going to
happen-- what has happened,
and what's going to happen?
>>OSTERHOFF: Exactly.
You are exactly right.
In 2020, we had the largest
mass exodus from women
from the workforce that we
have ever seen historically.
>>REGINA: And we have to put it
in a fair place in that, yeah,
we had COVID.
Yeah, you couldn't find daycare.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
OK, we get all that.
But--
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes,
and that's true,
and that's largely the reason
why we saw two times as many
women leave the workforce
than we saw men--
because of our roles in our
families and all of that.
However, since
schools and after care
and all of these things
have opened back up,
we still haven't
seen women rejoin
the workforce in the
same rates as we've
seen men rejoin the workforce.
And so women are not
going back to work.
And so it does.
It begs the question, why?
What's going on?
Well, it's because
going back to the way
that our societies are set up
and the infrastructures are
set up actually work
against the female biology.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: And working in that
way, you know, that consistent,
repeating 24-hour system where
there are the same expectations
of performance day
in and day out,
it eventually leads
women to burn out.
Now, what happened in
2020, when we started
to be able to work
from home, women
realized that they could
do things differently
and that they could operate in
a way that actually feels better
to them naturally.
>>REGINA: And statistically,
I mean, the workload was--
they were performing.
They were performing.
>>OSTERHOFF: Actually,
I would argue
that they were
performing better,
because they were
actually giving
their body what it needed.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: Now,
they probably didn't
have the scientific
explanation about what's
going on in their body,
but they probably tapped
into that intuitive insight and
understood that it feels better
in their body to do things
differently and have
more flexibility to
do things differently
throughout the month.
>>REGINA: That is just so
important that this information
become mainstream and
that corporations,
education systems--
because this has
to mean something
very different for girls who
are going through puberty
versus boys going through
puberty and the way
the educational
system is set up.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: It can't
work for both,
considering these differences.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Now, the silver lining--
and, you know, I'm
an eternal optimist,
so I just always want to
highlight the silver lining
here--
is that because
of this experience
that we had where we are
experiencing sweeping changes
across the globe all
at the same time,
and we are experiencing kind
of this shocking experience
of a global epidemic
across the globe,
all people at the
same time, this
brings this really great
opportunity for massive change
and massive behavior change--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: --which is
typically very difficult
to achieve.
And that's because
of a couple things.
So one is that when
we're experiencing
traumatic or shocking or
novel experiences, what
happens in the human
brain is that we
get a boost in neuroplasticity,
what we were talking
about earlier in the cycles.
Now, this is for all
people, men and women.
So right now,
across the globe, we
have this enhanced
neuroplasticity
and this enhanced ability
to learn, shift, and change
our behaviors.
Now, another thing that
happens when we experience
these new and
shocking experiences
is that it brings the
subconscious mind forward,
which typically can be kind
of difficult to access.
So these are kind
of the programs
that are set in the background
of our operation as humans.
Now, when that gets
brought forward,
we can more easily
change those programs
so that we can
behave differently.
>>REGINA: Greater
neuroplasticity--
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: --in times of trauma.
>>REGINA: And so this is
the greatest time to change.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
So now, going back to
those shifts that we need,
in order to support half of
the population in a better way,
we need to do this
in a couple of ways.
So one is more of a
top-down approach,
and that would be looking at
these societal infrastructures,
and especially in
the corporate world,
looking at the environments and
infrastructures and schedules
and starting to introduce
some flexibility so that women
can operate differently
and in partnership
with their bodies
and their cycles
so that they can perform
at a higher level.
>>REGINA: At a higher
level, absolutely.
It's going to be maybe a
little more challenging when
it comes to the
educational system
and how that can be worked out,
so there's some kind of equity,
but it can be done.
The problem is we
have no knowledge.
And you-- that's why I
love what you're doing--
you're of a generation that is
bringing this forward and going
to really be able to now
dedicate your life to this.
And my understanding-- I
think when we talked last,
you're working on an app?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, so I can't
share too much about it yet.
>>REGINA: OK, tell us a little
bit, though, because how
do we know where we are, right?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, exactly.
>>REGINA: OK, right.
>>OSTERHOFF: So it can be
a little tricky for women
to really understand what's
going on in their body
and where they are
in their cycle,
and especially if they're in
those parts of their life cycle
where they don't have an
active period that they can use
to track, or for other women
who are on hormone replacement
therapy and may not
have that milestone
that they can use to track.
Well, because of those
greater physiological changes,
there are other metrics that
we can use to track our cycles.
So I've developed
some technology,
some femtech that will be
coming out later on this year.
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>OSTERHOFF: And this will
allow women of any walk of life
to be able to understand what's
going on with their bodies.
And really, it will help
to raise self-awareness,
which is the first
step that we need
for this massive global change.
And it will give
them some education
about a lot of the things
that we discuss today.
>>REGINA: Right, to be able
to go into their own rhythms
and use the powers of
each cycle, like you're
doing consciously and
some of the people
that you've coached
and worked with.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
So going back to those
global shifts that we need,
this goes into that
bottom-up approach
that's needed in tandem
with that top-down approach.
We need education.
We need to educate,
especially, our young women
about their bodies and give
them that user's manual
that we all desperately need.
>>REGINA: I couldn't agree more.
I mean, I know you're
on it, and Katrine said,
you have to interview Kayla.
She is going to change
the world in this way.
And I agree with that.
If there's one final
thought you want to put out,
we've got just a few seconds.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, the one final
thing that I'd like to say
is that I want everyone
to look around and take
stock of what we have the
opportunity for right now.
Women are the greatest
untapped resource
that modern society
has access to
in order to create massive
global change and evolution.
>>REGINA: Hear, hear.
>>OSTERHOFF: In order to
tap into that resource,
we need to support our women.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: One,
women need permission
to do things differently.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: And the
second step to that
is allowing them flexibility in
order to do things differently.
>>REGINA: Nothing more
to add to that, Kayla.
Thank you so much.
And I would like to
have you back once you
have this app at a point where
it's developed and available
and we can see
how we use it, OK?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, please.
>>REGINA: Thank you so much
for dedicating yourself
to this just desperately
needed body of information.
>>OSTERHOFF: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: You can find out more
about Kayla's research and app
development by going
to herbiorhythm.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]